1
A Good Cafe on the Place St.-Michel

Then there was the bad weather. It would come in one day when the fall was over.
You would have to shut the windows in the night against the rain and the cold wind
would strip the leaves from the trees in the Place Contrescarpe. The leaves lay sodden
in the rain and the wind drove the rain against the big green autobus at the terminal
and the Cafe des Amateurs was crowded and the windows misted over from the heat and
the smoke inside. It was a sad, evilly run cafe where the drunkards of the quarter
crowded together and I kept away from it because of the smell of dirty bodies and
the sour smell of drunkenness. The men and women who frequented the Amateurs stayed
drunk all of the time or all of the time they could afford it; mostly on wine which
they bought by the half-liter or liter. Many strangely named aperitifs were advertised,
but few people could afford them except as a foundation to build their wine drunks on.
The women drunkards were called poivrottes which meant female rummies.

The Cafe des Amateurs was the cesspool of the rue Mouffetard, that wonderful narrow
crowded market street which led into the Place Contrescarpe. The squat toilets of the
old apartment houses, one by the side of the stairs on each floor with two cleated cement
shoe-shaped elevations on each side of the aperture so a locataire would not slip, emptied
into cesspools which were emptied by pumping into horse-drawn tank wagons at night. In the
summer time, with all windows open, you would hear the pumping and the odor was very strong.
The tank wagons were painted brown and saffron color and in the moonlight when they worked
the rue Cardinal Lemoine their wheeled, horse-drawn cylinders looked like Braque paintings.
No one emptied the Cafe des Amateurs though, and its yellowed poster stating the terms and
penalties of the law against public drunkenness was as flyblown and disregarded as its
clients were constant and ill-smelling.

All of the sadness of the city came suddenly with the first cold rains of winter, and there
were no more tops to the high white houses as you walked but only the wet blackness of the
street and the closed doors of the small shops, the herb sellers, the stationery and the
newspaper shops, the midwife--second class--and the hotel where Verlaine had died where you
had a room on the top floor where you worked.

It was either six or eight flights up to the top floor and it was very cold and I knew how
much it would cost for a bundle of small twigs, three wire-wrapped packets of short, half-pencil
length pieces of split pine to catch fire from the twigs, and then the bundle of half-lengths
of hard wood that I must buy to make a fire that would warm the room. So I went to the far side
of the street to look up at the roof in the rain and see if any chimneys were going, and how the
smoke blew. There was no smoke and I thought about how the chimney would be cold and might not
draw and of the room possibly filling with smoke, and the fuel wasted, and the money gone with it,
and I walked on in the rain. I walked down past the Lycee Henri Quatre and the ancient church
of St.-Etienne-du-Mont and the windswept Place du Pantheon and cut in for shelter to the right
and finally came out on the lee side of the Boulevard St.-Michel and worked on down it past the
Cluny and the Boulevard St.-Germain until I came to a good cafe that I knew on the Place St.-Michel.

It was a pleasant cafe, warm and clean and friendly, and I hung up my old waterproof on the coat
rack to dry and put my worn and weathered felt hat on the rack above the bench and ordered a cafe
au lait. The waiter brought it and I took out a notebook from the pocket of the coat and a pencil
and started to write. I was writing about up in Michigan and since it was a wild, cold, blowing
day it was that sort of day in the story. I had already seen the end of fall come through boyhood,
youth and young manhood, and in one place you could write about it better than in another. That
was called transplanting yourself, I thought, and it could be as necessary with people as with
other sorts of growing things. But in the story the boys were drinking and this made me thirsty
and I ordered a rum St. James. This tasted wonderful on the cold day and I kept on writing,
feeling very well and feeling the good Martinique rum warm me all through my body and my spirit.

A girl came in the cafe and sat by herself at a table near the window. She was very pretty with
a face fresh as a newly minted coin if they minted coins in smooth flesh with rain-freshened skin,
and her hair black as a crow's wing and cut sharply and diagonally across her cheek.
I looked at her and she disturbed me and made me very excited. I wished I could put her in the story,
or anywhere, but she had placed herself so she could watch the street and the entry and I knew she
was waiting for someone. So I went on writing.

The story was writing itself and I was having a hard time keeping up with it. I ordered another rum
St. James and I watched the girl whenever I looked up, or when I sharpened the pencil with a pencil
sharpener with the shavings curling into the saucer under my drink. I've seen you, beauty, and you
belong to me now, whoever you are waiting for and if I never see you again, I thought. You belong
to me and all Paris belongs to me and I belong to this notebook and this pencil.
Then I went back to writing and I entered far into the story and was lost in it. I was writing it now
and it was not writing itself and I did not look up nor know anything about the time nor think where
I was nor order any more rum St. James. I was tired of rum St. James without thinking about it. Then
the story was finished and I was very tired. I read the last paragraph and then I looked up and looked
for the girl and she had gone. I hope she's gone with a good man, I thought. But I felt sad.

I closed up the story in the notebook and put it in my inside pocket and I asked the waiter for a
dozen portugaises and a half-carafe of the dry white wine they had there. After writing a story I
was always empty and both sad and happy, as though I had made love, and I was sure this was a very
good story although I would not know truly how good until I read it over the next day.
As I ate the oysters with their strong taste of the sea and their faint metallic taste that the cold
white wine washed away, leaving only the sea taste and the succulent texture, and as I drank their
cold liquid from each shell and washed it down with the crisp taste of wine, I lost the empty feeling
and began to be happy and to make plans.

Now that the bad weather had come, we could leave Paris for a while for a place where this rain would
be snow coming down through the pines and covering the road and the high hillsides and at an altitude
where we would hear it creak as we walked home at night. Below Les Avants there was a chalet where the
pension was wonderful and where we would be together and have our books and at night be warm in bed
together with the windows open and the stars bright. That was where we could go.

I would give up the room in the hotel where I wrote and there was only the rent of 74 rue Cardinal
Lemoine which was nominal. I had written journalism for Toronto and the checks for that were due.
I could write that anywhere under any circumstances and we had money to make the trip. Maybe away from
Paris I could write about Paris as in Paris I could write about Michigan. I did not know it was too early
for that because I did not know Paris well enough. But that was how it worked out eventually. Anyway we
would go if my wife wanted to, and I finished the oysters and the wine and paid my score in the cafe and
made it the shortest way back up the Montagne Ste. Genevieve through the rain, that was now only local
weather and not something that changed your life, to the flat at the top of the hill.

"I think it would be wonderful, Tatie," my wife said. She had a lovely modeled face and her eyes and her
smile lighted up at decisions as though they were rich presents.
"When should we leave?"
"Whenever you want."
"Oh, I want to right away. Didn't you know?"
"Maybe it will be fine and clear when we come back. It can be very fine when it is clear and cold."
"I'm sure it will be," she said. "Weren't you good to think of going, too."

2
Miss Stein Instructs

When we came back to Paris it was clear and cold and lovely. The city had accommodated itself to winter,
there was good wood for sale at the wood and coal place across our street, and there were braziers outside
of many of the good cafes so that you could keep warm on the terraces. Our own apartment was warm and cheerful.
We burned boulets which were molded, egg-shaped lumps of coal dust, on the wood fire, and on the streets the winter
light was beautiful. Now you were accustomed to see the bare trees against the sky and you walked on the
fresh-washed gravel paths through the Luxembourg gardens in the clear sharp wind. The trees were beautiful
without their leaves when you were reconciled to them, and the winter winds blew across the surfaces of the
ponds and the fountains were blowing in the bright light. All the distances were short now since we had been
in the mountains.

Because of the change in altitude I did not notice the grade of the hills except with pleasure, and the climb
up to the top floor of the hotel where I worked, in a room that looked across all the roofs and the chimneys of
the high hill of the quarter, was a pleasure. The fireplace drew well in the room and it was warm and pleasant
to work. I brought mandarines and roasted chestnuts to the room in paper packets and peeled and ate the small
tangerine-like oranges and threw their skins and spat their seeds in the fire when I ate them and roasted chestnuts
when I was hungry. I was always hungry with the walking and the cold and the working. Up in the room I had a bottle
of kirsch that we had brought back from the mountains and I took a drink of kirsch when I would get toward the end
of a story or toward the end of the day's work. When I was through working for the day I put the notebook, or the
paper, away in the drawer of the table and put any mandarines that were left in my pocket. They would freeze if they
were left in the room at night.

It was wonderful to walk down the long flights of stairs knowing that I'd had good luck working. I always worked
until I had something done and I always stopped when I knew what was going to happen next. That way I could be sure
of going on the next day. But sometimes when I was starting a new story and I could not get it going, I would sit in
front of the fire and squeeze the peel of the little oranges into the edge of the flame and watch the sputter of blue
that they made. I would stand and look out over the roofs of Paris and think, "Do not worry. You have always written
before and you will write now. All you have to do is write one true sentence. Write the truest sentence that you know."
So finally I would write one true sentence, and then go on from there. It was easy then because there was always one
true sentence that you knew or had seen or had heard someone say. If I started to write elaborately, or like someone
introducing or presenting something, I found that I could cut that scrollwork or ornament out and throw it away and
start with the first true simple declarative sentence I had written. Up in that room I decided that I would write
one story about each thing that I knew about. I was trying to do this all the time I was writing, and it was good
and severe discipline.

It was in that room too that I learned not to think about anything that I was writing from the time I stopped
writing until I started again the next day. That way my subconscious would be working on it and at the same
time I would be listening to other people and noticing everything, I hoped; learning, I hoped; and I would
read so that I would not think about my work and make myself impotent to do it. Going down the stairs when
you had worked well, and that needed luck as well as discipline, was a wonderful feeling and I was free then
to walk anywhere in Paris.

If I walked down by different streets to the Jardin du Luxembourg in the afternoon I could walk through the
gardens and then go to the Musee du Luxembourg where the great paintings were that have now mostly been
transferred to the Louvre and the Jeu de Paume. I went there nearly every day for the Cezannes and to see
the Manets and the Monets and the other Impressionists that I had first come to know about in the Art Institute
at Chicago. I was learning something from the painting of Cezanne that made writing simple true sentences far
from enough to make the stories have the dimensions that I was trying to put in them. I was learning very much
from him but I was not articulate enough to explain it to anyone. Besides it was a secret. But if the light was
gone in the Luxembourg I would walk up through the gardens and stop in at the studio apartment where Gertrude
Stein lived at 27 rue de Fleurus.